# Flexbox and Grid

As we continue styling our web app, it becomes apparent that the tool-set we are familiar with needs to be expanded with a way to easily style layouts. In the past, this was primarily done via display: table, which opened its own can of worms, and is currently not recommended, so we will not dive into it.
The modern way to write layouts is to utilize the powerful layouting algorithms - Flex and Grid.

## Flexbox

Flexbox (or Flex) is a layouting algorithm used to arrange a group of items alongside a single axis (called the **primary axis**). It also allows us to create flexible layouts, which will automatically change size according to how much space the flexed container has, which is particularly helpful for creating responsive
layouts.

### flex-direction

Flexing a container has an effect on the items placed within it! We mentioned above the so-called primary axis, which is controlled by the flex-direction property. The default value is **row**, which arranges the items alongside the x-axis. We can switch it to **column**, which will make the y-axis the primary axis. The opposite of
the primary axis is called **the cross-axis**.

### Aligning items within the flex container

We can influence item distribution both alongside the primary and the cross axis.

When we distribute items along the primary axis, we distribute them as a group rather than single items. This is done via the **justify-content** property. With it we can align items at the beginning, center or end of the primary axis for example. We can also align items so that a certain amount of space between and around them is automatically created
by the algorithm.

To distribute alongside the cross-axis we use **align-items**. Both properties have some overlap of the values, but affect different axes. We can also align singular items in the flexed container via **align-self**.

It is important to note that we do not have a justify-self, as we cannot redistribute only one item alongside the primary axis - they need to move as a group. To gain a more visual understanding you can check the visual examples in the resources below.

### Growing and shrinking within the container

We can utilize the generic size property **flex-basis** to define the size of a flexed item, **if** we have enough space for it to stretch to this value. This stretches the item alongside the cross axis, so dependent on row or column it will affect its width or height.

We can also define how a flexed item can utilize excess available space via the **flex-grow** property. By default, this is 0, which means that this behavior is opt-in. Space will be distributed proportionally according to the flex-grow values given to the item. If on item has a flex-grow of 2 and another - 1, space will be divided in 2/3 and 1/3 accordingly.

Flex-grow has a counterpart - **flex-shrink**. This kicks in when a container is to small to have any excess space for the children. By default, each child has a flex-shrink of 1, which means that for two children, each will be reduced by half the deficit. If we have items worth 500px totally, and we shrink the container to 400, each item will forfeit 50px of width.

Do keep in mind that if an element inside a flex container has a minimum size (either given explicitly or from the browser stylesheet) it cannot be shrunk by the flex algorithm past the size! It will cause some nasty looking overflows.

### Wrapping

We can force our flex items to break out into a new row if we shrink the flexed container via **flex-wrap**. By default items do not wrap, so this must be opted-in. Do keep in mind that each new row will act as an additional primary axis. This also means that each row will have its own cross axis, as to avoid items overlapping. In short every row is its own small flex context. We can also position each row along the original cross-axis of the parent via the new **align-content** property.

## Grid

Grid is a layouting algorithm that lets us affect two dimensions at once - both rows and columns (in comparison to Flex's single dimension). Grid is particularly powerful for creating the layout of an application and also has responsiveness baked into it.

### display: grid

We use display: grid to begin defining our grid layout. Again, like Flexbox, this algorithm affects the children of the container, not the container itself. The grid container acts as a block element in the wider document flow. We have both an **implicit** and **explicit** rows. If we do not provide a number of rows, the grid will define new rows implicitly according to the number of children it has. Otherwise, if we provide rows, a set number of rows will be created, stretching to fill any available space.

### Defining columns and rows

By default, grid creates a single-column layout. We can override this with **grid-template-columns**. The code below creates a grid layout with two columns - the first taking 1/3 and the second - 2/3 of the available space.

```css
.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 2fr;
}
```

The units used above are called fractions, and recommended to use as opposed to percentages or pixels. This is because if we shrink the grid container and use percentages, the container will shrink below the minimum size of its content. This is something that fraction units **won't** do - once they hit the limit, the columns defined with fr will stop shrinking. Fraction units are concerned with **extra** space, much alike flex-grow.

We can also define a gap between our columns and rows with the **gap** property, which will be automatically accounted for if we use fr units.

If we place two children in the above-defined grid, they will be placed in the two columns on one row. Providing a third child will create an implicit second row. If we want more control, we can define rows with the **grid-template-row** property, which functions the same way as it column counterpart.

```css
.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 2fr;
  grid-template-rows: 1fr 3fr;
}
```

If we expect a large amount of columns or rows with equal space granted to each, we can utilize the **repeat** function, which will save us some writing.

```css
.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(7, 1fr);
  grid-template-rows: repeat(6, 1fr);
}
```

### How to place grid items where we want them?

We can do this in two ways. The first is to define a **grid-area** in our grid container.

```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 3fr;
  grid-template rows: 1fr 4fr;
  grid-template-area:
    'header header'
    'sidebar main'
}
.sidebar {
  grid-area: sidebar;
}
```

This will assign the sidebar in the first column of the second row - header will take up both columns and the upper row, whereas sidebar will share the second row with main.

The other way is to use the **grid-column** and **grid-row** properties, which will use the column lines created by the grid (4 columns have 5 lines!). Check the attached tutorial below for a clarifying visualization.

We can also use the span value here to have a column (or row) take the space of a specific number of columns (or rows). The example below will stretch the column to take the space of 3 columns (with gap calculated inside).

```css
.wide-column {
  grid-column: span 3;
}
```

### Item alignment

The way items are aligned is pretty similar to the Flex algorithm. **justify-content** will affect columns themselves (horizontal alignment), whereas **justify-items** will affect the horizontal alignment of the items themselves. We also have **justify-self** which will affect the horizontal alignment of a single item.

To align the rows (vertical alignment) we have all three align properties here as well - **align-content** (aligns the rows themselves), **align-items** (aligns the items inside of the grid vertically) and **align-self** (aligns a single item).

### Grid responsiveness

We can increase the responsive quality of our grid, by providing min and max values for our columns (or rows). In case there is enough space for the container the max value will be applied for the columns (or rows) with the opposite being true if we shrink the grid container. This is done with the **minmax** css function.

```css
.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fit, minmax(250px, 1fr));
}
```

If we do not have enough space, each column will take only 250px of space as opposed to 1fr, if we do have excess space. **auto-fit** will stretch out the available columns to take up as much space as it is available There is also the **auto-fill** value, which will attempt to create as many columns possible of the provided min or max size. The difference is subtle, but if we do not have enough items in our grid (remember we are not saying explicitly that we want 10 columns) auto-fit will distribute available space to them, whereas auto-fill will simply create more empty columns to pad out the space. So if we have a large container with one item, auto-fit will stretch the whole item into a single column, whereas auto-fill will create more columns.

## Resources

- Interactive Flex tutorial --> <https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/interactive-guide-to-flexbox/>
- Interactive Grid tutorial --> <https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/interactive-guide-to-grid/>
- auto-fit vs auto-fill --> <https://css-tricks.com/auto-sizing-columns-css-grid-auto-fill-vs-auto-fit/>